# pandas-challenge
This assignment involved creating and manipulating Pandas data frames to analyze school and standardized test data.
Resource information consisted of two Excel files: one containing a list of 15 schools with their respective student body sizes and total school budget amounts and another file containing the names of all the students in those schools with their respective genders, grade levels, and scores for reading and math. The two files were merged through a left join based on school name. 

From that, data frames were constructed to show key metrics for the school district as a whole and for each school within the district. Those frames included average math and reading scores and passing percentages for math and reading as well as an overall passing percentage. Additional frames showed top-performing and bottom-performing schools according to overall passing percentage, and scores by school for math and reading for each grade from 9 through 12 were also presented. Additional information was extracted to present average scores and passing percentages by school alongside  corresponding spending ranges per student and school size as well as a general summary of scores and percentages for schools according to type (charter vs district).

A Jupyter notebook was used to prepare the data frames, employing code learned and applied from class sessions as well as code provided in the notebook itself. One line of code in the section for producing the school_spending data frame was found through online research. When using the pd.cut function to construct this data frame, an error was    initially encountered: “ '<' not supported between instances of 'int' and 'str'." That error was resolved through discovery of a solution on stackoverflow.com, the use of ".str[1:].astype(float)" within the pd.cut function.

Reference:
Dahal, P. (2023, March 22). "Why am I getting TypeError: '<' not supported between instances of 'int' and 'str' with pandas'  cut() function?". Retrieved from stackoverflow.com:  https://stackoverflow.com/questions/75808415/why-am-i-getting-typeerror-not-supported-between-instances-of-int-and-st

Analysis of Data:
Analysis of district-wide standardized test results covered a total of 15 schools in the district that ranged in size, type (8 charter and 7 district), and budget allocation. Both average math and reading scores and percentage passing rates for math and reading were reviewed as well as an overall passing percentage. From this analysis, a couple of conclusions were reached.

One is that larger school sizes did not translate to higher scores and higher passing percentages. All of the highest percentage passing rates and the highest average reading score were at medium-sized schools, i.e., ones with 1,000 to 2,000 students. And the highest average math score was recorded at a small school (less than 1,000 students). The average math score was 6 points higher in the small school category than in the large school one. The average reading score was 2-3 points higher for small and medium-size schools than larger ones, and passing percentages especially showed wide disparity: percentage passing math was 23-24 points higher in small and medium-size schools than large ones, percentage passing reading 13-14 points higher, and overall passing percentage 31-32 points higher. Although larger schools might have more diverse student bodies and resources available to them (faculty, staff, budgets, etc.), those do not reflect higher standardized test results than smaller schools.

And resources in terms of budgets and spending led to another significant conclusion. Larger school budgets and higher per student spending did not equate to higher scores and passing percentages. To the contrary, the schools with the largest total budgets and per student spending had the lowest average scores and percentage passing rates. Conversely, those schools with lower total budgets and the lowest spending ranges showed the highest average scores and percentage passing rates. The five highest-performing schools had combined budgets equal to $4.9 million, or 20% of the district-wide aggregate budget, and per student budgets ranging from $578 to $638. Those schools had average math and reading scores greater than 83 and passing percentages greater than 90. In contrast, the five lowest-performing schools had combined budgets of $12.5 million, or almost 51% of the district-wide aggregate budget, and per student budgets ranging from $637 to $652. Yet those schools had average math scores of 76-77, average reading scores of 80-81, percentage passing math rates of 65-66, percentage passing reading of 80-81, and an overall passing percentage under 54. Despite, then, the higher total school budgets and per student spending at some schools, the schools with lower budgets and student spending actually performed higher on test results. In fact, for each average score and passing percentage category, as spending increased, the scores and passing percentages decreased.

Given the analysis of test results relative to school sizes and budgets, further analysis would be needed to identify more precisely the determinants of higher average scores and passing percentages. Given that size and higher budgets and per student spending by themselves do not equate to higher scores, more analysis of how budgets at individual schools are spent would be useful as well as whether there are factors other than budgets that affect test results. For example, considering the variation in sizes among schools in the district, do class sizes and faculty-to-student ratios have any bearing on test performance and results? Are there socio-economic differences between students at top-performing and bottom-performing schools that would also warrant study? Those and other considerations could inform decisions about not only school budgets but also other resources to improve test results across all schools.
